---
tags:
  - topic # mandatory
  - doc # 1th tag is page
title: Use-Cases
patterns:
  - 'use case'
summary: '<b>m-ld</b> can be used in apps, robotics, edge computing, personal data and many more'
date: 2020-02-01 # Used for sort order
---
> Here are just some of the uses for **m-ld**. If you have a use-case, please do
> [let us know](mailto:info@m-ld.io).

### Apps
App data rarely exists in isolation on a single device, but in-house
collaboration solutions are expensive and take years to get right. **m-ld** can
be a solution to data sharing in collaborative apps. It can also be incorporated
into existing architectures with entrenched database solutions, to support live
data editing features.

### Robotics
Robotics and AI are enabling labour-saving opportunities in industry. Fully
centralised control of such devices is impractical as decisions must be made
based on data with a high degree of liveness. **m-ld** can be used to support a
'shared-consciousness' model of derived knowledge, in which autonomous units are
able to keep each other instantly appraised of changes in their environment and
to their common objectives.

### Edge Computing
An approach to managing the deluge of data from traditional and IoT devices is
to localise data processing to the 'edge', a network of compute nodes that are
outside of dedicated data centres on the cloud. **m-ld**'s decentralised
approach is ideal for continuous maintenance of data state on unreliable or
temporary compute nodes, while guaranteeing data consistency.

### Personal Data
Consumer concerns about personal data include increasing awareness of data
ownership. The characteristics of **m-ld** support apps that allow consumers to
keep control over their data while still being able to safely keep it backed-up
in a choice of locations.
