---
tags:
  - topic # mandatory
  - news # 1th tag is page
title: Countdown to Launch 🚀
patterns:
  - 'Launch'
summary: m-ld is closing in on its vision
author:
  git: gsvarovsky
  name: George
date: 2023-10-04
linkedin: TODO
---
Wow. It's been a long road.

Back in 2020 I plunged into lockdown with a [vision](https://codeburst.io/the-data-%C3%A6ther-da22d28bc938). With a plucky new component called **m-ld**, I was going to drastically reduce the difficulty of building any system that shares live editable information – which is to say, most of them: not just multiplayer documents, but any app that allows an agent to change anything _shared_ at all.

I had _no idea_ how immensely long it would take, just to put something out there that I'm satisfied with. It seemed that every time I took one step forward, I saw ten additional steps to take.

Now, with the help of some truly special people, I'm excited to say those steps don't reach into infinity any more.

We've cracked some of the big tickets [(mentioned last time)](/news/#news_2023-06-22) that we always knew would be essential for adoption, but we never seemed to get to. They're now released with v0.10 of the Javascript engine, which also includes some significant reductions in the getting-started overhead – you can even experiment with **m-ld** domains and clones [right in the documentation](https://js.m-ld.org/).

Why not version 1.0? That's where **you** come in! A production-grade component is going to take a village – of enthusiasts, collaborators, and users. So far we've travelled primarily on our own conviction. Now we need **yours**. Can you see what we see? 

If you've been here before, first of all thanks for coming back. If you're new, welcome. Over the next few weeks I'll be out & about a lot more than I have been, and I really look forward to meeting you or catching up with you. I'm going to try and express our vision in a few different ways, and I'm going to be asking whether we're on the right track to solve your problems.

If you already have some thoughts, please please do [contact us](/hello/) or [book a chat on my calendar](https://bit.ly/m-ld-george-chat)! In any case thanks for reading and I'll see you out there.
