---
tags:
  - topic # mandatory
  - news # 1th tag is page
title: Sustainable Web Apps
patterns:
  - 'Web apps'
  - 'Text CRDT'
summary: m-ld expanding again, redefining web apps, and sharable text
author:
  git: gsvarovsky
  name: George
date: 2023-06-22
linkedin: TODO
---
> The World Wide Web, a "collaborative medium, a place where we can all meet and read and write" – Sir Tim Berners-Lee, 2005

Can we make it painless and fruitful to build apps that offer **live collaboration**, **linking of data between applications** and **robust security**, without having to lock users in, steal their attention, or take control of personal data?

What would you build?

This year, we're making it a reality. So far, with **m-ld**, we've been focused on developing the fundamentals of live information sharing (and we've made lots more progress, see below!). With our new project, [**Sustainable Web Apps**](https://github.com/m-ld/sustainable-web-apps), we're really leaning into the developer experience. We want building live, multi-collaborator experiences in web apps to be _fun_!

Joining us on this journey is [Petra Jaros](https://peeja.com/what-i-ve-been-working-on/), a super-powered Staff Engineer specializing in Linked Data, UI/UX, and TypeScript. Welcome Petra! I can't wait to see what we build together.

Of course, we're already working on some amazing ideas. We're going to adapt **m-ld**'s native query language to overlay perfectly onto the way modern web apps are built. Say hello to [**Reactive Observable Queries**](https://github.com/m-ld/sustainable-web-apps/blob/main/spec/design/xql.md)!
 
In the meantime, improvements to **m-ld** itself keep coming. We're especially excited to announce our answers to these common questions:

> Can I build a collaborative text document editor with **m-ld**, or have unstructured text as part of my structured data?

_It's coming in the JS engine v0.10!_

> Can I ensure a structured field in my data never becomes an array of conflicting values?

[_It's already here in the JS engine v0.9.2!_](https://js.m-ld.org/classes/shapeconstrained.html) It's part of our new experimental support for [SHACL](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/), the standard for declarative graph data schemas. Watch this space for more schema features as we work on our vision!
 
> Can I include binary data like images directly in **m-ld**?

_It's coming in the JS engine v0.10!_
 
> Can I get started without having to set up a pubsub infrastructure?

_We're working on the Gateway, an open-source cloud service that provides a server-based data store and message relay._

In the meantime, we've concluded our [**Securing Shared Decentralised Live Information**](https://github.com/m-ld/m-ld-security-spec) project. We did a ton of research into how security (and other critical application characteristics) can be reconciled with fully live information sharing. We're continuing to work on the necessary support in **m-ld**, and ensuring it's robust for production use.

We look forward to telling you more about our projects in the coming months. As usual we'd love to hear about your projects too! You can [contact us](/hello/) or just [book a chat on my calendar](https://bit.ly/m-ld-george-appointments).